# Domain name meanings

This article is about the personal meaning of `amissing.link` and
`anthes.is`.

## Table of Contents

<!-- mtoc-start -->

- [What was the meaning of "a missing link?"](#what-was-the-meaning-of-a-missing-link)
- [What is the meaning of "anthesis?"](#what-is-the-meaning-of-anthesis)

<!-- mtoc-end -->

## What was the meaning of "a missing link?"

The way I think of it is that when something is lost, it's found in the
last place a person looks. I figured that "a missing link" could
represent a website that someone hasn't visited yet. There's a certain
feeling a person can experience when they stumble upon a link to
something, click on it, and end up appreciating whatever it was they
found. I had hoped people would experience that feeling when they
discovered this website, and I still do.

## What is the meaning of "anthesis?"

It refers to the period when a flower is fully open and functioning, or
the beginning of that period. Another way to express it is by saying
"blossoming" or "blooming."

As a metaphor, it holds significance for me because I have been
searching for my path for a long time. In the past, I felt as though
there was a lack of brightness in my life. Fortunately, these days I
have more of what is necessary to grow.

In my opinion, blossoming does not mean that the difficult aspects of
life disappear permanently. Sometimes it still seems like there is not
enough light, and storms still rage from time to time. These things
arrive, stay for a while, and eventually fade away.

What I believe instead is this: to flourish is to understand that
nothing is permanent and to embrace these challenges for what they truly
are, rather than avoiding or trying to control them. If we only had
clear, sunny days, there would be no rain, and consequently, no
growth---essentially, no anthesis.
